= readsaber =

== Format ==
readsaber ?options? annotationfile result fastq ?fastq? ...

== Description ==
readsaber annotates the reads in fastq files with the sequences given in annotationfile.
It will create a read structure schema per read, which consists of a list of annotations as found in read. 
For each annotation (sequence found in the read) the following elements are added in the schema:
* strand: strand the annotation is found in, is + or -, or ~ for unknown/irrelevant
* annotation_name: This is the name of the annotation sequence in the fasta file. Keep these names short for better overview

If there is no annotation on the read for more than 2 bases, ~ N will be added to the schema. 
If the same annotation (name) occurs multiple times, interrupted by <= 2
bases, they are joined (shown only once in the schema). Overlapping annotation
are (currently) greedily cut, keeping the one encountered first.

readsaber is made to annotate reads with adapter, primer and other sequences which are
typically relatively short (~20 bases), and can handle these very well.
Matches that are significantly shorter may be missed.

For example, when annotating long read sequencing of 10x data with the following annotation file (contents)
{{{
>P5
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC
>Read1
ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT
>polyT
TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT
>Read2
GATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC
>P7
ATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG
>TSO
CCCATGTACTCTGCGTTGATACCACTGCTT
>ont5
ATCGCCTACCGTGACAAGAAAGTTGTCGGTGTCTTTGTGACTTGCCTGTCGCTCTATCTTC
>ont3
GAGACGCAACTATGGTGACGAACGTTATAGTCGTGGTTGTCTTTCGAC
}}}

the top 4 resulting read structures/schemas expected to be found here would be:
{{{
- TSO ~ transcript ~ N - Read1
+ Read1 ~ N ~ transcript + TSO
+ Read1 ~ N + polyT ~ transcript + TSO
- TSO ~ transcript - polyT ~ N - Read1
}}}

showing the reverse and forward default read structure (where N indicates the location of the barcode and UMI sequence)
of reads where the polyA was not detected (too short) and the same where it was detected.
There will typically be many more read structures, but with (much) lower
abundance, some of them due to the annotation process (e.g. missing elements because they are shortened or to different to match),
some due to actual different read structures present.


=== Results ===
Results will be written to the file given in **result**, a [[tsv]] file with the following fields
; rname: name of the read
; schema: read structure schema
; schema2: alternative read structure schema (adds size to N stretches)

Another file **<resultroot>_summary.tsv** (where <resultroot> is the file name **result** without filename extension),
will be made with summary data: each read structure found together with the number of reads
that have this structure (and the percentage). They are sorted by abundance, with the most common structures listed first

=== Transcript annotation ===
You can give (as an option) a reference genome sequence. In this case reads will also be aligned to this
reference genome (using minimap2 with the splice option) and locations in the read that align to it
will be annotated as "transcript".

== Arguments ==
* annotationfile: A fasta file with the sequences you want to annotate the reads
* result: result file: a [[tsv]] file with the annotation schema per read. Add .zst to the filename to compress (esp. for large data sets)
* fastq: fastq file(s) to annotate

== Options ==
; -refseq file/dir: file or directory containing a reference genome sequence, you can give this options multiple times
; -addsequences 0/1: set to 1 to add sequence data to the per read output file
; -keepintermediate 0/1: set to 1 to keep intermediate files for development/debugging
; -completeness number: annotations/assignments matching less then **number** percent of the annotation sequence are ignored (default 50)
; -ignoreN number: stretches with >= **number** unassigned bases will be indicated with N in the structure (default 3)
; -polyT number: A polyT will only be called by the specific polyT caller if at least **number** Ts (or As) were seen in a stretch (default 7).
   Set to 0 to not run the specific polyT caller

The command supports analysing fastqs/ubams in parallel using [[joboptions]], e.g. adding -d <number> will analyse each fastq on
a separate core on the local server with a maximum of <number> cores.


== Category ==
Annotation
